---
title: "MMM11: Phase-field modelling of microstructure evolution during complex thermal cycles : application to martensitic steels"
collection: talks
type: "Conference"
permalink: /talks/2024-09-26-MMM111
venue: "Prague Congress Centre"
date: 2024-09-26
location: "Prague, Czech Republic"
---

Talk at Multiscale Material Modelling 11 (MMM11) in Prague, Czech Republic.

[Slides (PDF)](jlhostis.github.io/files/pres_mmm11_jlh_20240926.pdf)

## Abstract

In numerous industrial processes (welding, additive manufacturing, …), materials are subjected to complex thermal treatments which have a significant impact on their microstructure and its evolution. Phase field models are nowadays largely used to investigate and predict phase transformations in metallic alloys in a high diversity of contexts. However, despite the tremendous interest of this approach in the scientific community, it turns out that it is often applied in quite simple situations with regard to thermal treatments, mainly because (i) the thermal history of the material is often not precisely known, as is (ii) the evolution of the thermodynamic and kinetic quantities with temperature.

In this work, a phase-field (PF) model is developed in order to study the effect of complex thermal cycles on the microstructure of a martensitic stainless steel during wire-arc additive manufacturing (WAAM). During this process, a wire is heated to fusion via an electrical arc, and the material is deposited layer after layer to create 3D parts. An already deposited layer n will thus experience successive thermal cycles as the part is being built, modifying its microstructure after solidification. In order to overcome the aforementioned constraints, (i) thermal cycles have been experimentally recorded during steel manufacturing and the resulting temperature evolution has been used as an input of the model. Secondly, (ii) the model has been coupled with the CALPHAD method and a thermodynamic database relevant for this material. A specific multi-time-step algorithm is proposed in order to consider the interaction between both displacive martensitic transformation and carbon diffusion during the process, which allows to exhibit subtle effects on the microstructure.

The validity of the methodology is discussed by direct comparison with atom probe carbon segregation maps obtained for this material built by WAAM and it is shown that the PF model allows for a good prediction of the amplitude and spatial distribution of these segregations.